.TH LIBFLOWD 3 "May 2026" "" "Flow Manual"
.SH NAME
libflowd \- the Flow runtime library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <flowd.h>

flowd_runtime *flowd_load_ir(const char *ir_json);

int flowd_register_tool(flowd_runtime *rt, const char *name,
                        flowd_effect_level level,
                        const char *signature,
                        flowd_tool_fn implementation,
                        const char *impl_version,
                        void *user_ctx);

int flowd_register_model(flowd_runtime *rt, const char *name,
                         const char *signature,
                         flowd_model_fn implementation,
                         const char *impl_version,
                         void *user_ctx);

int flowd_register_provider(flowd_runtime *rt,
                            const flowd_provider_adapter_t *adapter);

int flowd_set_redactor(flowd_runtime *rt,
                       flowd_redactor_fn redactor,
                       void *user_ctx);

int flowd_set_budget(flowd_runtime *rt,
                     uint64_t tokens_limit,
                     double cost_cents_limit,
                     uint64_t elapsed_ms_limit);

int flowd_cancel(flowd_runtime *rt);

char *flowd_run(flowd_runtime *rt, const char *input_json,
                const char *trace_dir,
                char **suspension_token);

char *flowd_run_named(flowd_runtime *rt, const char *flow_name,
                      const char *input_json,
                      const char *trace_dir,
                      char **suspension_token);

char *flowd_replay(flowd_runtime *rt, const char *flow_name,
                   const char *original_trace_dir,
                   const char *new_trace_dir,
                   const char *new_model_id);

char *flowd_resume(flowd_runtime *rt, const char *token,
                   const char *decision_json,
                   char **suspension_token);

char *flowd_last_error_json(flowd_runtime *rt);

void flowd_destroy(flowd_runtime *rt);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B libflowd
loads a Flow IR document, registers tool and model
implementations against it, and runs flows against typed inputs.
Each execution writes a complete trace directory recording
inputs, intermediate values, model identities, and outputs of
every node.
.PP
The library is non-reentrant per
.B flowd_runtime
handle.  Callers must serialize calls to a given runtime, or use
one runtime per thread.  This is the static public surface;
dynamic-load entry points \(em compiling a
.I .flow
source rather than loading a pre-compiled IR document \(em are
planned for a separate
.I flowd_dynamic.h
header, added later without rewriting this surface.
.SH FUNCTIONS
.TP
.B flowd_load_ir
Load an IR document.  Returns NULL on any error;
.B flowd_last_error_json(NULL)
returns the diagnostic.
.TP
.B flowd_register_tool
Register a tool implementation against the IR's declared tool of
the same name.  Returns 0 on success or an R15x code; see
.B ERRORS
below.  The
.I signature
is the tool's input and output type written in Flow's surface
syntax, e.g.
.BR \(dq(string) -> CreditHistory\(dq .
.I impl_version
is host-chosen and recorded in every trace this runtime produces.
.TP
.B flowd_register_model
Register a model implementation.  Models are always at effect
level
.BR FLOWD_EFFECT_MODEL ;
the level is implied.
.TP
.B flowd_register_provider
Register a provider adapter with the gateway.  Adapters are
tried in registration order; the first whose
.B supports_model
returns non-zero handles each model call.  When an adapter is
registered, model calls route through the gateway by preference;
.B flowd_register_model
remains supported as a fallback for hosts that prefer per-model
function pointers.  Secrets (API keys) enter the runtime through
the adapter's
.B user_ctx
and must never appear in flow inputs or in the recorded inputs of
any tool call.  This is the three-layer secrets pattern:
convention, adapter discipline, and the redactor hook
.RB ( flowd_set_redactor ).
.PP
.RS
The adapter struct carries two invocation entry points.
.B invoke
returns the response JSON as a heap-allocated string or NULL with
.I *err_msg
set.
.B invoke_with_metrics
(optional) fills a
.B flowd_adapter_response_t
with response JSON, error message, and provider-reported
.IR tokens_in ,
.IR tokens_out ,
and
.IR cost_cents .
The gateway prefers
.B invoke_with_metrics
when set and rolls reported tokens and cost into the run's budget.
An adapter must set at least one of the two pointers.
.RE
.TP
.B flowd_set_redactor
Install a host-supplied byte-rewrite callback that the trace
writer applies to every value it persists.  This is layer 3 of
the three-layer secrets pattern \(em a defense-in-depth hook for
the case where layers 1 (convention) or 2 (adapter discipline)
were violated.  The callback receives canonical bytes and returns
either a heap-allocated transformed buffer (the runtime frees it)
or NULL to leave the original bytes untouched.  The hash chain in
the content-addressed value store runs on the redacted form, so
two values whose pre-redaction forms differed but whose redacted
forms match share content addresses.  Replaces any prior redactor;
passing NULL clears.
.TP
.B flowd_set_budget
Set a per-run budget for subsequent runs on this runtime.  Each
limit caps a run's cumulative total across all model calls; a limit
of 0 means no limit for that dimension.  When a model call would
exceed a limit it fails with
.B R161
and the run returns NULL.  Token and cost figures come from
metrics-reporting provider adapters, and cached model calls are
counted as well.  Usage resets at the start of each run.
.TP
.B flowd_cancel
Request cooperative cancellation of the in-progress run.  The
executor checks at each binding boundary and, if set, aborts: the
run returns NULL, its trace is sealed with status
.BR cancelled ,
and the error is
.BR R160 .
Intended to be called while a run is in flight \(em from a signal
handler, another thread, or a tool callback (it sets a
.BR sig_atomic_t ).
The flag clears at the start of every run.
.TP
.B flowd_run
Run a flow.  Returns the flow's output JSON on completion (caller
frees), or NULL on suspension or error.  Inspect
.I *suspension_token
to distinguish suspension (non-NULL) from error (NULL).
.TP
.B flowd_run_named
Run a specific named flow from a multi-flow IR.  Behaves like
.B flowd_run
otherwise.  Returns NULL with
.B R155
in
.B flowd_last_error_json
if
.I flow_name
is not declared in the loaded IR.
.TP
.B flowd_replay
Re-execute a previously recorded flow run, writing a new trace.
.I flow_name
must match the recorded flow's name.
.I original_trace_dir
is the trace directory produced by an earlier
.BR flowd_run ;
.I new_trace_dir
is the root under which the replay's new trace is written (by
convention distinct from the original's root so the original is
preserved).  A NULL
.I new_model_id
selects same-model replay \(em every model call restores its
recorded output and no provider is invoked; a non-NULL
.I new_model_id
selects model-versioned replay \(em every model call re-invokes
via the gateway against that model id, with the inputs the
original recorded.  Returns the replay's output JSON on success
(caller frees) or NULL on error.  Every node in the new trace
carries a
.B replay_of
cross-reference pointing at the corresponding node in the
original.
.TP
.B flowd_resume
Resume a suspended flow.  The runtime writes a new trace
directory linked to the original by
.B resumed_from
on the new manifest and by per-node
.B replay_of
cross-references.  Those cross-references cover the pre-suspension
restored nodes, the suspended node, and the synthesized input and
output nodes; nodes that run live after the suspension point do not
carry
.BR replay_of .
The original suspended trace is unchanged.  See
.BR flow-suspension (7)
and
.BR flow-trace (5)
for the contract.
.PP
.RS
.I decision_json
is the value injected at the suspension point; it must conform
to the suspended tool's declared output type.  For the built-in
.B await_human_approval
tool, this is the approval payload (approver, decision,
rationale, timestamp, policy_ref).
.RE
.TP
.B flowd_last_error_json
Return the most recent error as a JSON object (caller frees).
Returns NULL when no error is pending.  The call is read-and-clear
\(em it returns the stored pointer and resets the slot to NULL, so a
second call without an intervening failure returns NULL.  The error slot is
process-global, not per-runtime: the
.I rt
argument is ignored, the call returns whatever error was recorded
last by any runtime (or by a failed
.BR flowd_load_ir ),
and passing NULL is equivalent to passing any handle.  With more
than one runtime live in a process, callers must serialize the
operation that fails with the
.B flowd_last_error_json
call that reads its error.
.TP
.B flowd_destroy
Destroy a runtime handle.  Safe to call with NULL.
.SH CALLBACK OWNERSHIP
.B flowd_tool_fn
and
.B flowd_model_fn
return
.B char *
heap-allocated by the callee.  The runtime calls
.B free
on the returned buffer after consuming it.  On error, the
callback returns NULL and sets
.I *err_json
to a heap-allocated JSON error object \(em also freed by the
runtime.
.SH EFFECT LEVELS
.TP
.B FLOWD_EFFECT_PURE
Level 0: no I/O.  Memoizable freely; replayable locally without
re-invocation.
.TP
.B FLOWD_EFFECT_DETERMINISTIC
Level 1: external lookup, no side effects.  Cacheable; replay
restores from trace by default.
.TP
.B FLOWD_EFFECT_MODEL
Level 2: nondeterministic by nature (LLMs, samplers, human
judgment).  Model-versioned replay re-invokes against a different
model identity with the recorded inputs.
.TP
.B FLOWD_EFFECT_MUTATION
Level 3: side-effectful.  Not safely retryable without
idempotency tokens.  Replay restores from trace and does NOT
re-invoke.
.SH ERRORS
.B flowd_register_tool
and
.B flowd_register_model
return 0 on success or one of:
.TP
.B R151
Effect-level mismatch with the IR's declaration. Also returned by
.B flowd_register_tool
for a model-level tool, which must be registered through
.BR flowd_register_model .
.TP
.B R152
No tool of this name in the IR.
.PP
The
.I signature
argument is recorded but not yet validated against the IR's
declared type, so registration never fails on a signature
mismatch.
.PP
.B flowd_register_provider
returns 0 on success or
.B 150
if the adapter struct is malformed (missing the required function
pointers).
.PP
The execution entry points report their failure cause through
.BR flowd_last_error_json .
A few conditions have dedicated codes:
.B R160
for cancellation (see
.BR flowd_cancel ),
.B R161
for a budget overrun (see
.BR flowd_set_budget ),
and
.B R157
for a replay or resume that cannot proceed because a node's
re-derived input no longer matches the recorded input.
.B R155
is the runtime's generic catch-all for runtime-error conditions
that have no dedicated code of their own.  Thus
.B flowd_run_named
returns NULL with
.B R155
when
.I flow_name
is not declared in the loaded IR, and
.B flowd_resume
returns
.B R155
when
.I decision_json
does not conform to the suspended tool's declared output type \(em
both reported under the same catch-all code.
