.TH FLOW-IR 5 "May 2026" "" "Flow Manual"
.SH NAME
flow-ir \- the Flow IR JSON schema
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Flow intermediate representation is a JSON document the
compiler emits and the runtime consumes.  It is the durable
contract between authoring and execution: the source language
may evolve, runtime implementations may be replaced, but a v1.0
IR document remains loadable by every v1.x runtime.  The
document is byte-deterministic for a given input.
.SH TOP-LEVEL SHAPE
.RS
.nf
{
  "ir_version":  "1.0",
  "compiled_at": "1970-01-01T00:00:00Z",
  "source_file": "path/to/input.flow",
  "types":       [ ... ],
  "tools":       [ ... ],
  "flows":       [ ... ]
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B ir_version
identifies the schema version.  v1.0 is the locked v1 contract;
v1.x is additive and backwards-compatible.
.PP
.B compiled_at
is an RFC 3339 UTC timestamp.  It honors
.B SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
so identical sources under pinned toolchains produce byte-
identical IR.  The test driver pins it to zero.
.PP
.B source_file
is the input path as it appeared on the command line.
.PP
.BR types ,
.BR tools ,
and
.B flows
are arrays of declarations in source order.
.SH TYPE ENCODING
A type reference in any position (field type, parameter type,
return type) is encoded as a string:
.IP \(bu 2
Primitive:
.BR \(dqstring\(dq ,
.BR \(dqint\(dq ,
.BR \(dqfloat\(dq ,
.BR \(dqbool\(dq .
.IP \(bu 2
Named user type: the bare identifier, e.g.
.BR \(dqApplication\(dq .
.IP \(bu 2
List:
.BR \(dq[T]\(dq
with brackets around the element type's string form.  Nested lists
render as
.BR \(dq[[T]]\(dq .
.SH RECORD TYPES
.RS
.nf
{
  "name":   "Application",
  "kind":   "record",
  "fields": [
    {"name": "applicant_id", "type": "string"},
    {"name": "amount",       "type": "float"}
  ]
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
The
.B kind
field is
.BR \(dqrecord\(dq .
The
.B fields
array gives field names and types in source order.
.SH SUM TYPES
.RS
.nf
{
  "name": "Hypothesis",
  "kind": "sum",
  "variants": [
    {
      "name":   "DeployCaused",
      "fields": [
        {"name": "suspect_deploy_id", "type": "string"},
        {"name": "diff_url",          "type": "string"}
      ]
    },
    {
      "name":   "Unknown",
      "fields": [
        {"name": "confidence", "type": "float"}
      ]
    }
  ]
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B kind
is
.BR \(dqsum\(dq .
The
.B variants
array lists variants in source order; each carries its own
fields list.
.SH TOOLS
.RS
.nf
{
  "name":   "fetch_credit",
  "input":  [{"name": "id", "type": "string"}],
  "output": "CreditHistory",
  "effect": { "level": "deterministic" }
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B effect.level
is one of
.BR \(dqpure\(dq ,
.BR \(dqdeterministic\(dq ,
.BR \(dqmodel\(dq ,
.BR \(dqmutation\(dq .
Model-level tools carry an additional
.B effect.model
field naming the configured model, e.g.
.BR "\(dqeffect\(dq: { \(dqlevel\(dq: \(dqmodel\(dq, \(dqmodel\(dq: \(dqrisk-v1\(dq }" .
.PP
A non-default retry policy, if the source declares one, is emitted as an
.B effect.retry
object:
.BR "{\(dqkind\(dq: \(dqforever\(dq}" ,
.BR "{\(dqkind\(dq: \(dqcount\(dq, \(dqvalue\(dq: 3}" ,
or
.BR "{\(dqkind\(dq: \(dqbackoff\(dq, \(dqinitial\(dq: 100, \(dqmax\(dq: 5000, \(dqfactor\(dq: 2}" .
The clause is omitted entirely when the tool uses the default policy.
.SH FLOWS
.RS
.nf
{
  "name":   "signup",
  "params": [
    {"name": "it", "type": "SignupRequest", "implicit": true}
  ],
  "output": "SignupResult",
  "bindings": [
    {"name": "customer", "expr": { ... }}
  ],
  "return": { ... }
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B params
lists the flow's parameters in source order; the implicit
.B it
parameter is flagged with
.BR "\(dqimplicit\(dq: true" .
.B output
is the return type's string form.
.B bindings
is the ordered list of
.RB \(dq name \(dq/\(dq expr \(dq
pairs from the flow body, and
.B return
is the flow's final return expression.
.PP
Each expression is a tagged node with a
.B kind
field \(em for example
.BR \(dqpath\(dq
(with a
.B segments
array),
.BR \(dqcall\(dq
(with
.B tool
and
.BR args ),
.BR \(dqconstruct\(dq
(with
.B type
and
.BR fields ),
or
.BR \(dqpipeline\(dq .
A pipeline node carries a
.B source
expression and a
.B stages
array, each stage being a record with its own
.BR kind ,
.BR op ,
and operator-specific fields.
The compiler's IR preserves the source's logical structure;
flattening to the runtime's execution graph (one record per
node, with stable
.B node_id
fields) is the runtime's job and produces the trace records
described elsewhere.
.SH DETERMINISM
The emitter is single-pass and writes JSON with fixed key order
(no hashtable iteration on output).  Floats render via
.B %g
under
.B LC_NUMERIC=C
to guarantee the same bytes on every locale.  An identical
source file produces an identical IR document, byte for byte,
across machines and across builds of the compiler under the
same toolchain.
