.TH FLOW 5 "May 2026" "" "Flow Manual"
.SH NAME
flow \- the Flow source language
.SH DESCRIPTION
A
.I .flow
file declares the type schema, the tool interface, and
the pipeline of one or more named flows.  The file is UTF-8 text;
comments start with
.B #
and run to end of line.  Identifiers begin with a letter or
underscore and continue with letters, digits, or underscores.
Whitespace is non-significant except as a separator.
.PP
A complete file has three sections, in source order: type
declarations, tool declarations, flow declarations.
Each section is optional but appears in this order when present.
.SH TYPES
Type declarations introduce record types used by tools and flows:
.PP
.RS
.nf
type Application = {
  applicant_id: string,
  amount:       float
}

type CreditHistory = {
  delinquencies: int
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
The
.B =
between the type name and the brace is required, and fields are
separated by commas (a trailing comma is permitted).
.PP
Field types are primitives
.RB ( string ,
.BR int ,
.BR float ,
.BR bool ),
record types declared elsewhere, or list types written
.BR [T] .
Record types are nominally typed; two records with the same
fields and different names are distinct types.
.PP
Sum types declare named variants.  The body is a list of variants,
each introduced by a leading
.BR | ,
with no
.B sum
keyword:
.PP
.RS
.nf
type Hypothesis =
  | DeployCaused { suspect_deploy_id: string, diff_url: string }
  | Unknown      { confidence: float }
.fi
.RE
.PP
Variants are matched with
.B match
expressions in flow bodies.
.SH TOOLS
Tool declarations name a callable, give its typed signature, and
declare its effect level.  The
.B effect
clause is mandatory; a tool with no effect clause is rejected
with diagnostic
.BR E198 .
.PP
.RS
.nf
tool fetch_credit(id: string) -> CreditHistory
  effect deterministic

tool assess_risk(app: Application, credit: CreditHistory) -> RiskScore
  effect model("risk-v1")

tool send_email(to: string, body: string) -> bool
  effect mutation
.fi
.RE
.PP
The effect level is exactly one of
.BR pure ,
.BR deterministic ,
.BR mutation ,
or
.BR model ( \[dq] id \[dq] ).
A model-level tool carries a model identifier in parentheses; the
identifier is opaque to the compiler and meaningful only to the
runtime's gateway.  The level may be followed by an optional
.B retry
clause, for example
.BR "effect deterministic (retry: 3)" .
.PP
There is no separate
.B model
declaration: a model is named only by a tool's
.B model("id")
effect, or by a
.B pick using
stage inside a pipeline.
.SH FLOWS
A flow declares a typed pipeline from input to output:
.PP
.RS
.nf
flow eligible(apps: [Application]) -> [Application] {
  apps
  | select EnrichedApp {
      app:    row,
      credit: fetch_credit(row.applicant_id),
      risk:   assess_risk(row, credit)
    }
  | where credit.delinquencies == 0 and risk.score < 0.5
  | select app
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
The body is enclosed in braces and is zero or more
.RB ` "name = expr" '
bindings followed by a required return expression.  The return
expression here is a pipeline: a chain of stages connected by
.BR | ,
where each stage consumes the output of the previous one.  In
expression stages such as
.B select
and
.BR any / all ,
the current element is bound to
.B row
and the element's fields are also in scope by bare name.  A
.B where
or
.B rank
clause names the element's fields directly by bare name and does not
use a
.B row
prefix.
A flow with a single parameter may name it
.B it
implicitly by writing the parameter as a bare type, as in
.RB ` "flow review(Application) -> Decision" '.
.SH PIPELINE STAGES
.TP
.B select <expr>
Transform each row by constructing a new record or projecting a
field.
.TP
.B where <pred>
Filter rows by a boolean predicate.  Operands are the element's
fields named directly (no
.B row
prefix), outer bindings, literals, or calls, compared with
.BR == ", " != ", " < ", " > ", " <= ", " >=
and joined by
.B and
and
.BR or .
.TP
.B rank <field> asc|desc
Sort rows by a field, ascending or descending.
.TP
.B dedupe by <expr>
Remove duplicate rows by a key expression.
.TP
.B concat <expr>
Concatenate another list of the same row type.
.TP
.B take <int>
Take the first
.I n
rows.  The count is a literal integer.
.TP
.B top
Terminal stage: yield the single first row, typically after a
.BR rank .
Fails with diagnostic
.B R110
on empty input.
.TP
.B pick using <model>
Terminal stage: have a model rank candidates and return the single
best one.  Fails with diagnostic
.B R110
on empty input.
.TP
.B count
Terminal aggregator: yield the number of rows.
.TP
.B "sum / max / min <field>"
Terminal aggregators that reduce a numeric field across rows.
.TP
.B any / all <expr>
Terminal aggregators that yield a boolean over the rows.
.SH CONTROL FLOW
Flows can branch and compose:
.PP
.RS
.nf
flow review(Application) -> Decision {
  band = risk_band(it)
  match band {
    High   h -> await_human_approval(it),
    Medium m -> standard_review(it),
    Low    l -> auto_approve(it)
  }
}
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B match
Dispatch on a sum-type value.  The scrutinee must be a path, so a
computed value is bound first
.RB ( "band = risk_band(it)" ).
The arms are written inside braces, separated by commas, each as
.RB ` "Pattern -> expr" '.
A pattern is an upper-case variant tag (optionally followed by a
binder name), a lower-case binder that matches the whole value, or
.B _
as a wildcard.  Matches must be exhaustive.
.TP
.B conditional
Inline
.B "if A then B else C"
on a boolean; the
.B else
arm is required, and may be chained with
.BR "else if" .
.TP
.B try / else
.B "try E else F"
runs
.IR E ;
on failure it runs
.IR F .
Both must have the same type.  Used for graceful degradation of
Level 1 lookups; the recovered codes are runtime errors such as
.BR R101 .
.TP
Sub-flow calls
A flow may call another flow declared in the same file.  The
call is type-checked the same way a tool call is.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The compiler emits diagnostics with stable identifiers.
.B E10x
codes cover the lexer (E101 non-ASCII byte outside a comment, E105
unexpected character, E106 malformed numeric literal, ...);
.B E11x
covers parse errors (E110 syntax error);
.B E12x
covers the resolver (E122 unknown tool or flow, E123 unknown type,
E124 unknown name, E198 tool missing its
.B effect
clause, ...);
.B E14x
and
.B E15x
cover the checker (E144 argument type incompatible, E143 predicate
must be
.BR bool ,
E160 non-exhaustive match, ...).  Runtime diagnostics use
.B R1xx
identifiers (R101 tool call failed, R110
.BR top / "pick using"
on empty input).  The id is stable across versions; the message
text may change.  See
.B vscode-flow
for editor integration that consumes these codes.
