.TH FLOW-TRACE 5 "May 2026" "" "Flow Manual"
.SH NAME
flow-trace \- the Flow trace directory layout
.SH DESCRIPTION
A Flow trace is the on-disk record of one flow execution: every
node's inputs, intermediate values, model identities, outputs,
timing, retries, and effect-level metadata.  The trace is the
artifact compliance reviewers and auditors consult to reconstruct
why a given decision came out the way it did, and the input that
.B "flowd replay"
and
.B "flowd diff"
operate on.
.PP
The format is JSON throughout.  It is designed for additive
evolution: adding optional fields to any record is safe;
removing or renaming fields requires explicit migration.
.SH LAYOUT
One execution produces one directory:
.PP
.RS
.nf
traces/<flow_name>/<execution_id>/
  manifest.json
  nodes/
    <node_id>.json
    ...
  values/
    <sha256>.json       \(em values above the inline threshold
    ...
  audit.log             \(em append-only access records
.fi
.RE
.SH MANIFEST
.I manifest.json
is the entry point for any reader.  Required fields:
.PP
.RS
.nf
{
  "trace_version":  "1.0",
  "execution_id":   "exec_2026_05_26_a3f2b1",
  "flow":           "adjudicate",
  "ir_version":     "1.0",
  "ir_hash":        "sha256:91c4...",
  "input_hash":     "sha256:8b2e...",
  "output_hash":    "sha256:e0a1...",
  "started_at":     "2026-05-26T12:00:00.123Z",
  "ended_at":       "2026-05-26T12:00:03.456Z",
  "elapsed_ms":     3333,
  "status":         "complete",
  "node_count":     5,
  "model_calls":    [ ... ],
  "budget_summary": {"tokens_in": 14, "tokens_out": 8, "cost_cents": 0.0000}
}
.fi
.PP
.B budget_summary
totals the provider-reported usage across every
.B model_call
in the run.
.B model_calls
entries carry the same per-call
.BR tokens_in ,
.BR tokens_out ,
and
.B cost_cents
when the provider adapter reports them (0 otherwise).
.RE
.PP
.B status
is one of
.BR complete ,
.BR failed ,
or
.BR suspended .
.SH NODE RECORDS
Each
.I nodes/<node_id>.json
records one node's execution:
.PP
.RS
.nf
{
  "node_id":      "n3",
  "node_kind":    "model_call",
  "effect_level": "model",
  "model":        "risk-v1",
  "started_at":   "2026-05-26T12:00:01.200Z",
  "ended_at":     "2026-05-26T12:00:02.800Z",
  "elapsed_ms":   1600,
  "invocations":  [
    {"inputs": { ... }, "output": { ... }}
  ],
  "retries":      [],
  "errors":       null
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
The
.B invocations
array holds one record per row of input the node processed.
A direct tool or model call produces a single invocation; each
record carries its own
.B inputs
and
.BR output .
An
.B input
or
.B output
node omits
.B inputs
and records only the produced
.BR output .
.PP
.B node_kind
is one of:
.BR input ,
.BR output ,
.BR tool_call ,
.BR model_call ,
.BR subflow_call ,
or
.BR suspension .
The
.B input
and
.B output
nodes are synthesized at the boundaries of every execution;
.B tool_call
and
.B model_call
record tool invocations (a tool with
.B "effect model(...)"
becomes a
.BR model_call );
.B subflow_call
records a call into another flow; and
.B suspension
records a pause point such as
.BR await_human_approval .
.PP
Nodes mark external boundaries only \(em the calls above plus the
synthesized input and output.  Pure in-flow computation (arithmetic,
field access, construction, conditionals, match, the pipeline stages)
runs inside a node but never becomes one: a trace records where
execution crossed into the external world, not how it computed
between crossings.  That is also what keeps replay tractable \(em
there is nothing to replay in
.BR "a + b" .
.PP
.B effect_level
is one of:
.BR pure ,
.BR deterministic ,
.BR model ,
or
.BR mutation .
.SH VALUE STORAGE
Inputs and outputs use one of two reference forms.
.TP
.B inline
For values under the 64 KiB threshold:
.BR \(dq{\(dqinline\(dq: <value>}\(dq .
The value lives directly in the node record.
.TP
.B hash
For larger values, stored in
.IR values/<sha256>.json :
.BR \(dq{\(dqhash\(dq: \(dqsha256:...\(dq}\(dq .
The value is referenced by content hash and lives in the
.I values/
directory.
.PP
Content-addressed storage allows values to be pruned, encrypted,
redacted, or geographically partitioned independently of the
trace structure.
.SH RETRIES AND ERRORS
.B retries
is an array of retry records; the current runtime always
emits an empty array, which means no retries were recorded.
.PP
.B errors
is
.B null
on success or
.BR \(dq{\(dqmessage\(dq: ...}\(dq
on failure.
.SH MODEL IDENTITY
A
.B model_call
node records the model it dispatched to with flat fields
alongside the rest of the node record:
.PP
.RS
.nf
  "provider":      "openai",
  "model":         "risk-v1",
  "model_version": "2024-01-25",
  "tokens_in":     14,
  "tokens_out":    8,
  "cost_cents":    0.0000,
  "retry_attempts": 0,
.fi
.RE
.PP
In v1 the runtime always records
.BR model ;
.BR provider ,
.BR model_version ,
and the usage stats
.RB ( tokens_in ,
.BR tokens_out ,
.BR cost_cents )
are filled in only when a provider adapter supplies them, and
are otherwise omitted.
.B retry_attempts
is the number of gateway retries before the call succeeded
(0 = first-try success).
The manifest's
.B model_calls
array indexes every
.B model_call
node, each entry carrying its
.BR node ,
.BR provider ,
.BR model ,
and
.B version
when known.  These fields are what
.B "flowd replay"
uses to re-invoke model nodes against a new model.
.SH AUDIT LOG
.I audit.log
is an append-only, JSON-Lines record of trace access.  One JSON
object per line, with the fields:
.BR timestamp ,
.BR event
(for example
.B trace_read
or
.BR value_read ),
.BR caller ,
.BR trace_id ,
.B decision
(for example
.B allow
or
.BR system ),
and
.BR duration_ms .
.SH COMPATIBILITY
The trace format is the durable contract.  Adding optional fields
to any record is safe.  Removing or renaming fields requires an
explicit migration step.  When the runtime cannot read a trace
directory \(em a missing or unreadable
.I manifest.json
included \(em it emits diagnostic
.BR R301 .
.SH DETERMINISM
Two runs of the same flow against the same inputs produce
byte-identical traces when both run under a pinned wall clock and
a pinned execution-id source.  The runtime honors two environment
variables for this:
.TP
.B SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
A decimal Unix timestamp.  When set, every
.B started_at
and
.B ended_at
in the manifest and node records, and the date prefix on every
.BR execution_id ,
is derived from this value rather than the wall clock.  This is
the reproducible-builds convention; the same value across two
runs yields the same timestamps.
.TP
.B FLOWD_EXECUTION_ID_SUFFIX
Six lowercase hex characters.  When set, the suffix portion of
every
.B execution_id
(the six characters after the date) takes this value rather than
being drawn from
.IR /dev/urandom .
Test suites set this alongside
.B SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
to produce byte-identical trace directories across runs.  Hosts
should never set it in production: the suffix exists to make
execution IDs unique across concurrent runs, and pinning it
collapses that uniqueness.
.PP
With both variables pinned, two runs of a flow that calls only
pure and deterministic tools produce
.IR diff(1) -clean
trace directories.  The test suite
.RB ( tests/api/test_trace.c )
asserts this property; the
.B make sanitize
matrix verifies it under address, undefined-behavior, and thread
sanitizers.
