.TH FLOW-EFFECTS 7 "May 2026" "" "Flow Manual"
.SH NAME
flow-effects \- the Flow effect-level hierarchy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Every tool the runtime invokes sits at one of four effect levels.
The level is an IR field carried on every tool's signature.  The
runtime's behavior at each node \(em caching, retry, parallelism,
and replay strategy \(em derives from the level.  The effect
level is the property that makes model-versioned replay safe to
perform automatically: the runtime knows from the level alone
which nodes can re-invoke, which restore from trace, and which
must never re-invoke.
.SH LEVELS
.TP
.B "Level 0 \(em pure"
No I/O.  Same inputs always produce the same outputs.
Memoizable freely.  Replayable locally without re-invocation,
since recomputation produces the same bytes the trace recorded.
.TP
.B "Level 1 \(em deterministic"
External lookup, no side effects.  Same inputs produce the same
outputs modulo external state.  Cacheable; replay may either
re-invoke or restore from trace.  Typical examples: a credit
history lookup, a database read, a pure HTTP GET.
.TP
.B "Level 2 \(em model"
Nondeterministic by nature \(em LLMs, samplers, human judgment.
Inputs are deterministic; outputs vary.  Replay restores from
trace by default; model-versioned replay re-invokes against a
different model identity with the recorded inputs.
.TP
.B "Level 3 \(em mutation"
Side-effectful.  Sends emails, writes databases, publishes
events.  Not safely retryable without idempotency tokens.
Replay against a mutation node restores from trace and does NOT
re-invoke unless explicitly directed.
.SH FAILURE SEMANTICS
.TP
.B "Level 0 failure"
Programming error.  The runtime fails the node loudly with the
failure recorded in the trace.  No retry.  A pure tool should
not, in principle, fail at all; if one does, the flow is buggy.
.TP
.B "Level 1 failure"
Transient failures (network errors, timeouts, HTTP 5xx) fail the
node on the first attempt.  Deterministic tools are not retried: the
runtime makes a single call and surfaces any failure immediately.
Retry is wired only into the model gateway (see Level 2); a retry
policy on a non-model effect clause has no effect.  On failure the
node fails with diagnostic
.BR R101 .
.TP
.B "Level 2 failure"
Output nondeterminism is expected and not retried as such; only
transport errors retry.  The model gateway handles its own retry
policy.
.TP
.B "Level 3 failure"
Failure of a mutation node means the side effect may or may not
have taken place.  Retry requires an idempotency token supplied
by the host.  Without one, the runtime fails the node and
records partial-side-effect status in the trace.
.SH REPLAY SEMANTICS
A model-versioned replay walks the original trace and:
.IP \(bu 2
restores Level 0 and Level 1 node outputs from the trace (Level
0 may be recomputed; the result is identical by construction),
.IP \(bu 2
re-invokes Level 2 nodes against the new model with the recorded
inputs,
.IP \(bu 2
restores Level 3 nodes from the trace and does NOT re-invoke.
.PP
This split is what makes model-versioned replay safe: the
side-effect boundary is honored without manual coordination
between the runtime and the host.  A compliance reviewer
certifying a model upgrade does not have to know which nodes
write to which downstream systems; the IR's declared effect
levels carry that information.
.SH SOURCE SYNTAX
In a
.I .flow
source file, effect levels are declared on tool signatures:
.PP
.RS
.nf
tool fetch_credit(id: string) -> CreditHistory
  effect deterministic

tool assess_risk(app: Application, credit: CreditHistory) -> RiskScore
  effect model("risk-v1")

tool send_email(to: string, body: string) -> bool
  effect mutation
.fi
.RE
