.TH FLOW-SUSPENSION 7 "May 2026" "" "Flow Manual"
.SH NAME
flow-suspension \- suspension and resumption semantics
.SH DESCRIPTION
A node in a Flow execution can return one of three results: a
value (the normal case), an error (which propagates per
effect-level rules), or a suspension token.  Suspended nodes can
be resumed when their wait condition is satisfied.  The trace
records the suspension token, the wait condition, the eventual
resumption, and the resumed-from state; replay handles suspension
as first-class state, and the forthcoming trace UI is being
designed around it.
.PP
The v1 runtime ships the
.I infrastructure
for suspension but only one built-in suspending tool.  Additional
suspending tools are easy to add later because they slot into the
existing machinery.
.SH WAIT CONDITIONS
A suspension token carries a wait condition.  The v1 runtime
recognizes only
.BR human_approval .
The other two categories below are not built into the runtime; a
host can implement them against the suspension infrastructure (see
.B WHAT V1 DOES NOT INCLUDE
).
.TP
.B human_approval
A human reviewer must approve, reject, or override the decision.
The built-in
.B await_human_approval
tool returns this category.  This is the only category the v1
runtime recognizes.
.TP
.B scheduled_time
The flow resumes at a wall-clock time
.IR T .
The host is responsible for scheduling the wake-up; the runtime
accepts a "resume at T" trigger but does not itself schedule one.
Use cron, systemd timers, or a job scheduler.
.TP
.B external_event
The flow resumes when an external event fires.  The host receives
webhooks (or other event sources) and calls the runtime's resume
API; flowd does not own the HTTP surface.
.SH BUILT-IN AWAIT_HUMAN_APPROVAL
The only suspending tool the v1 runtime ships built-in.  The
audit story for regulated industries depends on human-approval
payloads being legible without per-deployment schema invention.
The built-in standardizes the payload shape:
.PP
.RS
.nf
{
  "approver":           "compliance@example.com",
  "decision":           "approve",
  "rationale":          "Risk score within policy bounds.",
  "decision_timestamp": "2026-05-26T14:22:08.531Z",
  "policy_ref":         "policy-2026-04-15"
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B decision
is one of
.BR approve ,
.BR reject ,
or
.BR override .
The standardized shape lets downstream justification tools consume
it without per-host adaptation, and gives the forthcoming trace UI
a payload it can render natively.
.SH RESUMPTION PROTOCOL
The runtime's resume API,
.BR flowd_resume (3),
takes the suspension token from a prior run and a decision payload
(the value being injected at the suspension point).  Resumption is
a separate execution: the runtime writes a new trace directory
linked to the original by the
.B resumed_from
manifest field and by per-node
.B replay_of
cross-references on every node of the resumed run.
.PP
The original suspended trace is unchanged.  Its manifest stays
.BR "\(dqstatus\(dq: \(dqsuspended\(dq"
forever \(em because that is what it was.  The trace store is
append-only; history is not edited, it is extended.  A flow that
suspended and was later resumed produced two distinct executions:
the original, whose outcome is
.BR suspended ,
and the resumed run, whose outcome is whatever it eventually
reached.  Both directories persist; the relationship between them
is recoverable from the cross-references.
.PP
A flow that suspends and resumes multiple times produces a chain
of trace directories, each
.B resumed_from
the previous.  Walking the chain backward reconstructs the
complete event history.  Walking it forward from any point yields
the latest known state.
.SH WHAT V1 DOES NOT INCLUDE
.TP
.B Other built-in suspending tools.
Hosts may implement
.B await_scheduled_time
and
.B await_external_event
against the suspension infrastructure in v1; built-in versions
ship in v1.1.
.TP
.B Wall-clock scheduling.
The runtime accepts "resume at T" triggers but does not itself
schedule them.
.TP
.B Webhook receivers.
The host receives webhooks and calls the runtime's resume API.
flowd does not own the HTTP surface.
