.TH FLOW-PROVENANCE 7 "May 2026" "" "Flow Manual"
.SH NAME
flow-provenance \- decision provenance and the trace artifact
.SH DESCRIPTION
Decision provenance is the recorded chain of evidence \(em
inputs, intermediate values, model identities, outputs \(em that
lets a third party reconstruct
.I why
an automated decision came out the way it did.  Flow is
infrastructure for decision provenance: the runtime writes a
complete trace of every execution to disk, and supports
.B model-versioned replay :
re-executing a recorded decision against a different model with
the originally captured inputs, writing a fresh trace whose nodes
each carry a
.I replay_of
cross-reference back to the original, so the two traces can be
compared node-for-node.
.PP
Provenance and orchestration are different categories that share
technology.  Orchestration frameworks run pipelines; Flow records
evidence.  The pipeline-orchestration substrate is present here
but secondary to the recording machinery.
.SH THE CHAIN OF EVIDENCE
Every node in a Flow execution writes a record to the trace:
.IP \(bu 2
its inputs (inline JSON or content-addressed hashes),
.IP \(bu 2
its output (same),
.IP \(bu 2
the timing (started_at, ended_at),
.IP \(bu 2
any errors recorded for the node,
.IP \(bu 2
the effect level the IR declared for it (which governs replay
behavior),
.IP \(bu 2
for model calls: the provider, the model name, and the model
version (the call's inputs and output are recorded as the node's
invocations, inline or content-addressed like any other node).
.PP
The trace's integrity is the audit artifact.  Inputs and outputs
are hashed; the trace records the hashes; the values themselves
live in a content-addressed store that can be pruned, encrypted,
redacted, or geographically partitioned independently of the
trace structure.
.SH REPLAY AND RESUME
The effect level the IR records for each node governs what replay
does with it:
.IP \(bu 2
.B pure
and
.B deterministic
nodes are restored from the recorded trace \(em their outputs are
reproducible, so re-running them would only waste work;
.IP \(bu 2
.B mutation
nodes are
.I never
re-invoked \(em replay must not repeat an external side effect, so
the recorded output stands in for the call;
.IP \(bu 2
.B model
nodes are re-invoked only on a model-versioned replay (a new model
id supplied to
.BR flowd_replay );
otherwise the recorded output is restored like any other.
.PP
Every node a replay or resume writes carries a
.I replay_of
cross-reference \(em the original trace dir, the original node id,
and a
.I mode
of
.B restored_from_trace
(the output came from the recorded trace) or
.B re_invoked
(the node was executed again).  A reviewer can therefore tell, node
by node, what was reproduced versus recomputed.
.PP
.B Resume
continues a run that suspended at an
.B await_human_approval
node.  It writes a new trace \(em a sibling of the original under the
same
.IR <traces>/<flow>/ \ parent,
its execution id tagged
.B _resumed
\(em whose manifest records a
.I resumed_from
pointer to the suspended trace.  Nodes recorded before the
suspension are restored, the suspended node takes the host's
injected decision, and nodes after it run live.
.PP
.B Integrity guard.
Before a replay or resume restores a node's recorded output, the
runtime confirms the input it just re-derived matches the input the
original recorded for that node.  If an IR or upstream change made
the node receive a different input, restoring the stale output would
silently corrupt the reconstruction, so the run fails with
.B R157
instead.  Replays and resumes are thus byte-faithful or they stop;
they never quietly diverge.
.SH AUDIENCES AND USE CASES
.TP
.B Pre-launch policy review.
Compliance reviews the
.I .flow
source file directly.  The flow
.I is
the policy: which tools are consulted, what thresholds gate the
decision, what the fallback path is.  No engineering mediation
required.
.TP
.B Auditing contested decisions.
When a customer disputes a decision, the reviewer opens that
execution's trace and reads it end-to-end.  Every input, every
intermediate value, every model invocation, every output is
recorded.
.TP
.B Certifying model upgrades.
When a model is upgraded, compliance replays last quarter's
decisions through the new model, quantifies the diff, documents
the changes, and attaches the diff to the change-management
record.  Model-versioned replay is the mechanism.
.TP
.B Responding to subpoenas.
Legal requests for the reasoning behind a specific past decision
require evidence that is admissible.  The trace is the evidence:
the original execution is preserved verbatim, cryptographically
hashed, and replayable on demand.
.SH WHAT PROVENANCE IS NOT
.TP
.B Ongoing decision-quality monitoring.
Tracking rejection rates, decision distributions, or model
confidence over time is operational observability, not
provenance.  The runtime does not ship a metrics endpoint;
per-call token and cost counts are surfaced only when a model
provider adapter reports them, and aggregating, dashboarding, or
alerting on them is the host's observability stack.
.TP
.B Predictive what-if analysis.
"What would happen if we lowered the threshold from 0.5 to 0.4?"
is simulation, not replay.  The runtime replays recorded
executions; it does not ship a simulation substrate, and
predictive what-if analysis is a downstream concern.
.TP
.B General agent orchestration.
Flow is not a distributed-systems platform, not a general-purpose
programming language, not a model-training or inference platform.
Those are downstream concerns.
