.TH FLOW 7 "May 2026" "" "Flow Manual"
.SH NAME
flow \- overview of the Flow toolchain
.SH DESCRIPTION
Flow is a small declarative language for typed agent workflows,
a compiler that emits a JSON intermediate representation, and a
runtime that executes the IR and writes a complete trace of every
step.  The runtime supports
.B model-versioned replay :
re-executing a recorded decision against a different model with
the originally captured inputs, producing a diff against the
original outcome.
.PP
The system divides into three artifacts with three audiences.
The DSL is what workflow authors write \(em
.I .flow
files describing tools, types, and pipelines.  The IR is the JSON
intermediate representation the compiler emits and the runtime
consumes \(em the durable contract between the two sides.  The
runtime executes the IR and produces traces \(em the operational
artifact that compliance reviewers and auditors read to
reconstruct why a given decision came out the way it did.
.SH COMPONENTS
.TP
.B flowc
The compiler.  Reads a
.I .flow
source file, type-checks it, and emits a Flow IR document.
.TP
.B flowd
The runtime.  Loads an IR document, registers tool and model
implementations, executes flows, and writes traces.  Ships as a
C99 library and a CLI handling flow execution, trace replay, and
trace diffing.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I *.flow
Flow source files.
.TP
.I *.ir.json
Flow IR documents emitted by the compiler.
.TP
.I traces/<flow>/<execution_id>/
Per-execution trace directories written by the runtime.
.SH STANDARDS
The C components target ISO C99 against POSIX.1-2008.  The IR is
byte-deterministic; the compiler honors
.B SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
for the
.B compiled_at
field.  The runtime extends the contract: identical inputs against
an identical runtime produce byte-identical traces.
