.TH FLOWD 1 "May 2026" "" "Flow Manual"
.SH NAME
flowd \- the Flow runtime CLI
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B flowd
.I subcommand
.RI [ options ]
.PP
.B flowd --help
.br
.B flowd --version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B flowd
executes flows
.RB ( run ),
strict-compares two recorded traces
.RB ( replay ),
and diffs traces
.RB ( diff ).
Re-executing a recorded run against a new model is done through the
C API
.BR flowd_replay (),
not this binary;
.B replay
here only compares two existing trace directories.
The
.B run
subcommand executes a compiled IR against deterministic,
type-directed stub tools, so the
.B flowc
\(->
.B flowd
chain is runnable from the command line for any program; it is a
smoke/dry execution \(em the flow's own logic runs for real, but the
tool implementations are stand-ins.  Production execution with real
tool behavior happens through
.B libflowd ,
called from a host program or via a language binding: the library
owns the tool implementations and records traces.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.SS run
Execute a flow from a compiled IR and write a trace.
.PP
.RS
.nf
flowd run <ir.json> [--flow NAME] [--input JSON] [--trace-dir DIR]
.fi
.RE
.PP
A type-directed stub is registered for every tool the IR declares
(returning a default value of the tool's output type), and the
flow is executed against them.  The flow's expressions, pipelines,
conditionals, and
.B match
arms are evaluated for real; only the external tool calls are
stubbed.  The flow's output is printed to stdout and a full trace
is written under
.IR --trace-dir
(default
.IR ./traces ).
.TP
.BI --flow " NAME"
Flow to run.  Defaults to the first flow declared in the IR.
.TP
.BI --input " JSON"
Flow input as a JSON value.  When omitted, a default input is
synthesized from the flow's parameter types.
.TP
.BI --trace-dir " DIR"
Root under which the
.I <flow>/<execution_id>/
trace directory is written.  Defaults to
.IR ./traces .
.SS replay
Compare a recorded trace against its replay, asserting that the
fields it checks match.
.PP
.RS
.nf
flowd replay <original_trace_dir> <new_trace_dir>
.fi
.RE
.PP
Divergences are reported on stdout in the same JSON form as
.BR diff ,
and only the same fields are compared: six manifest fields (flow
name, IR hash, input and output hashes, status, node count) and
each node's recorded
.B invocations
array.  Other recorded fields \(em node kind, effect level,
provider, model, token counts, and the
.B replay_of
cross-reference \(em are not compared, so \(lqno divergences\(rq
means the compared subset matches, not that the two traces are
byte-for-byte identical.  The exit status is 0 only when that
subset matches.
Re-execution itself \(em restoring Level 0 and Level 1 nodes
from recorded outputs, re-invoking Level 2 (model) nodes against
a new model with the recorded inputs, and restoring Level 3
(mutation) nodes without re-invoking \(em happens through the
library function
.BR flowd_replay ()
declared in
.IR flowd.h ;
this subcommand compares the trace such a replay writes against
the original.
.SS diff
Compare two traces \(em typically an original and its replay \(em
and report per-node differences.
.PP
.RS
.nf
flowd diff exec_2026_05_26_a3f2b1 exec_2026_11_20_replay
.fi
.RE
.PP
Output is a JSON report listing divergences in the manifest
(flow name, IR hash, input and output hashes, status, node
count) and in each node's recorded invocations.  Trace nodes
exist only at external boundaries
.RB ( input ,
.BR output ,
.BR tool_call ,
.BR model_call ,
.BR subflow_call ,
.BR suspension );
pipeline stages such as
.B select
and
.B where
are not recorded as nodes and do not appear in the diff.  Unlike
.BR replay ,
.B diff
exits 0 whether or not divergences are found.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --help
Show usage and exit.
.TP
.B --version
Show version and exit.
.TP
.BI --load-ir " path"
Test-only.  Load an IR file and print a human-readable
introspection summary of the resulting runtime state.  This flag
exercises the loader for the fixture suite; it is not part of the
public surface and may change between phases.
.TP
.BI --canonical-dump " path"
Test-only.  Load an IR file and print a byte-deterministic JSON
canonical form of the loaded runtime state.  Like
.BR --load-ir ,
this is for the fixture suite and is not a stable interface.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.  For
.BR run ,
the flow completed (or suspended) and its trace was written; for
.BR replay ,
the compared fields show no divergences; for
.BR diff ,
the comparison completed (divergences, if any, are reported on
stdout and do not affect the exit status).
.TP
.B 1
Invocation error (no subcommand given, or unknown subcommand);
for
.BR run ,
the IR failed to load or the flow errored during execution; for
.BR replay ,
the traces diverge.
.TP
.B 2
Missing arguments, or a trace directory could not be read.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I traces/<flow_name>/<execution_id>/
Per-execution trace directory.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
Decimal Unix timestamp.  When set, the trace writer uses this
value for every timestamp it emits and for the date prefix on
every
.BR execution_id .
This is the reproducible-builds convention.
.TP
.B FLOWD_EXECUTION_ID_SUFFIX
When set, every
.B execution_id
suffix takes this value rather than reading
.IR /dev/urandom .
Six lowercase hex characters is the recommended form, but this is
not enforced: the code takes the first six bytes of any value at
least six characters long, verbatim.
Pin it alongside
.B SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
to produce byte-identical trace directories across runs, a
stronger property than the
.B replay
subcommand checks (it compares only the manifest fields and
recorded invocations described above).  Do not set this in
production: the suffix
exists to keep execution IDs unique across concurrent runs.
