.TH FLOWC 1 "May 2026" "" "Flow Manual"
.SH NAME
flowc \- the Flow compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B flowc
.RI [ options ]
.I file
.PP
.B flowc --help
.br
.B flowc --version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B flowc
reads a
.I .flow
source file, lexes it into tokens, parses the tokens into an
abstract syntax tree, resolves names against the declarations at
the top of the file, type-checks every tool call and pipeline
stage against the declared signatures, and emits a JSON
intermediate representation.  Diagnostics go to standard error;
the IR goes to standard output unless
.B -o
is given.
.PP
.B flowc
does not generate code in any host language, link a runtime, or
execute flows.  Those are jobs for downstream tooling that reads
the IR.  The library form,
.B libflowc.a ,
exposes the same compilation pipeline to in-process callers; it is
the foundation for editor and watch-mode integrations.
.SH OPTIONS
Exactly one input file is required.  Reading source from standard
input is not supported.
.SS Overall options
.TP
.BI -o " file"
Write the IR to
.I file
instead of standard output.  A
.I file
of
.B -
means standard output.
.TP
.B -c
Accepted for compatibility; has no effect.
.TP
.BI -x " flow"
Specify the input language.  Only
.B flow
is accepted.
.TP
.B --help
Show usage and exit.
.TP
.B --version
Show version and exit.
.SS Warning options
.TP
.B -Wall
Accepted for compatibility; performs no additional checks.
.TP
.B -Wextra
Accepted for compatibility; performs no additional checks.
.TP
.B -Wpedantic
Accepted for compatibility; performs no additional checks.
.TP
.B -Werror
Treat all warnings as errors.
.TP
.BI -Werror= id
Accepted for compatibility; the bare
.B -Werror
applies, but per-warning
.I id
selection performs no additional action.
.TP
.BI -Wno- id
Accepted for compatibility; performs no additional action.
.TP
.B -w
Accepted for compatibility; performs no additional action.
.SS Diagnostic options
.TP
.BI -fdiagnostics-format= fmt
Select the diagnostic format:
.B text
(the default) or
.BR json .
.TP
.B -fno-diagnostics-color
Disable color in textual diagnostics.
.TP
.BI -fmax-errors= n
Stop after
.I n
errors.  A value of
.B 0
means unlimited; the default is
.BR 1 .
.SS Language options
.TP
.B -std=flow-v0
The default language standard.
.TP
.B -std=flow-v0-strict
Accepted for compatibility; strict mode is not yet implemented, so
this behaves the same as
.BR -std=flow-v0 .
.SS Debug and internals
.TP
.BI --dump= stage
Stop after
.I stage
and emit the intermediate state.  Valid stages are
.BR tokens ,
.BR ast ,
.BR resolved ,
.BR checked ,
and
.BR ir .
The compiler exits after the dump.
.TP
.B --check-only
Run the pipeline through resolve and check; suppress IR emission.
Exit 0 if no errors.  Useful for editor integration.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.B flowc
emits diagnostics in GCC-compatible format:
.PP
.RS
.nf
<path>:<line>:<col>: <severity>[<code>]: <message>
.fi
.RE
.PP
.I severity
is one of
.BR error ,
.BR warning ,
or
.BR note .
.I code
is a stable identifier (e.g.
.BR E122 ,
.BR E140 )
that does not change across versions; the message text may.
The
.B vscode-flow
extension's problem matcher consumes this format directly.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Compilation succeeded.
.TP
.B 1
Compilation failed (one or more errors emitted).
.TP
.B 2
Invocation error.
.TP
.B 3
I/O error.
.TP
.B 4
Internal compiler error.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
Controls the
.B compiled_at
field in the emitted IR.  The test driver pins it to zero so
golden files stay stable across machines.
.TP
.B FLOWC_DIAGNOSTICS_COLOR
Override color in textual diagnostics.  Accepts
.BR always ,
.BR never ,
or
.BR auto .
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable color in textual diagnostics when set to any non-empty
value.
.TP
.B LC_NUMERIC
Forced to
.B "C"
at startup so
.B %g
formatting produces the same bytes regardless of inherited
locale.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I *.flow
Flow source files.
.TP
.I *.ir.json
Flow IR documents.
